That was easy.
I was thinking, should I do three?
But then I thought I thought you were
going to. Ah.
>> [sighs]
>> I I think I definitely I I definitely
could have.
Um but I'll tell you now, whenever I do
stiff-legged deadlift, this is the thing
with a stiff-legged deadlift. The idea
of it is to take quadriceps and leg
drive out of the equation. So, it's a
deadlift without quads, without leg
drive. It's pure posterior chain. You
know, I'm sure that for everyone it's
different. I'm pretty sure that my back
is strong and my hips are strong, but my
hamstrings are probably the most
neglected area from all of my
powerlifting training. I'd say
conventional deadlifts, hamstrings
neglected. Squats, hamstrings neglected.
But the lower back isn't neglected and
the hips and glutes and adductors aren't
neglected. So, for me, I feel that the
hamstrings are the weakest link, which
is why I'm doing this. And I think that
all powerlifters should emphasize
additional hamstring work. So, how does
that How could that be? So, when you do
a squat or a deadlift, you're bending
your knees more. The more you bend your
knees, the less you use your hamstrings.
If all you do is squat and deadlift, I
know people are thinking, of course you
use your hamstrings with those. Sorry,
but not much. Of course, yeah, you do,
but really not much. Except for
stiff-legged deadlift, you do use more
hamstrings cuz we're taking the
quadriceps out of it. We're not bending
the knees quite as much, which means
less quads and more tension is placed on
the hamstrings. So, you know, for those
who like if that is a little bit
confusing, try this. Try and stretch
your hamstrings. So, what we want is to
contract a muscle uh to train a muscle,
you want to take a full length, you
know, create tension on the muscle and
then contract it. So, think of this.
Lock your knees and touch your toes,
right? So, this is how we stretch our
hamstrings, right? Now, bend your knees.
What happens? It's very easy to bend
down even further. Why? Because we're
reducing tension off the hamstrings. The
hamstrings attach right here. It's
called the sit bone. So, that's the
bottom of your pelvis, ischial
tuberosity, and they attach on either
side of the lower leg. So, when my
knee's locked, it's tension on the
hamstring. When I bend my knee, it
relieves the tension on the hamstring.
Because it's relieving the tension on
the hamstring, it doesn't act on that
joint very well. So, therefore, um
they're not They're not being trained
very well with squats and conventional
deadlifts or even sumo deadlifts if
that's how you uh deadlift as a
powerlifter. Therefore, therefore,
hamstrings are a weak point and they
definitely are for me. So, just then
when I was doing the lift, you know,
back in my younger days, I wouldn't
care. I'd just keep on lifting, to be
honest. And I don't really care for the
consequences. But, you know, as I get
more experience with my training, like I
feel tension on the muscle and it's
like, okay, that could be a warning
shot. There was no pain. Like that was
super easy. But at the same time, those
are the times where it's not planned
for. And this is something that I do
with all of my athletes and myself. Like
I've done it too many times. It's like,
you plan for two reps or whatever it is
and they're easy. So, you scream out,
"One more! One more!" Like I've done
that before and I know you guys have
done it as well. And then the next rep
you miss it or you're not ready for it
and you've got to kind of like reset
your thought process and then you'll
come in and then something can happen.
Like it doesn't mean that you're going
to injure yourself, but you could. And
then you're going to walk out of the
session really pissed off. So, that's
why I like to say, I'd prefer to walk
out of the session knowing that I could
have done more than regretting that I
didn't stick to the damn plan, right?
So, anyway, um so, that's my top set,
260 for two. Um yeah, really happy that
that was so much easier than I thought
it would be. Oh, yeah, I thought that
was going to be real tough. Now, I'm
going to do what I believe is the best
strategy to peak in strength as quickly
as possible to the highest level
possible. And that is the top set back
down set method. So, now I'm going to do
my back down work. My back down work is
going to be
RDLs.
All right. So, what's the difference
between the two? Stiff-legged deadlift,
you'll see I like to start those from a
dead stop. So, it has a lot better
carryover to a conventional deadlift,
which is where you start with a dead
stop. Uh and then the the RDLs for me,
uh the difference between the two is
you're not resetting each rep uh and
you're you're maintaining constant
tension. So, the objective here is to
build hamstrings. So, that's what
today's session is about. Is
yeah, targeting the weak points, which
you need to do. Um and my RDLs are going
to be lighter. It's not as strong as an
exercise. Uh RDLs. RDLs because it's
it's more fatiguing. It's constant
tension. You'll see. I'll be placing
emphasis on the eccentric portion,
whereas if you saw the stiff-legged
deadlift, just pick it up, boom, pick it
up, boom. Now, a lot of people call RDLs
and uh stiff-legged deadlifts different
things to what I call them. So, people
consider a stiff-legged deadlift as less
knee bend to do more hamstrings and an
RDL is more knee bend to do
more glutes and less hamstrings.
Did I say that right? I think so.
SLDL, stiffer legs, more hamstrings.
RDL, bent knees, more glutes. I consider
a bent knee deadlift is a conventional
deadlift. So, um you know, I don't care
really. You can call it what you like,
but that's how I differentiate it in my
programming. Stiff-legged deadlift,
Romanian deadlift, same muscles
targeted, but just different emphasis.
Emphasis on the stiff-legged deadlift is
from the
starting from the dead stop. So,
generates force from zero, which is
great for
sprinters who do, you know, sprint off
the blocks, on your marks, get set, and
then they wait for ages until the go and
it's
from zero to explode. So, that's a rate
of force production. And starting
exercises from a dead stop is a great
way to train that. Same with a boxer
needs to not, you know, start with the
eccentric and throw a big punch because
your opponent's going to see it coming.
So, they have to go from zero to
straight in.
Um you know, I'm not trying to be a
boxer or anything like that, but you
need to be able to explode from zero,
otherwise your opponent knows it's
coming. So, that's what I mean by it.
That's a great exercise, great way to
train that. It's called start strength.
Uh and that's the stiff-legged deadlift.
Now, the RDL
it still strengthens hamstrings and
glutes and posterior chain.
And it still So, it's great for
strength. Both of them are great for
strength, great for muscle building. But
the RDL is just more time under tension.
>> [sighs]
>> More time under tension doesn't always
equate to more hypertrophy, but in this
instance it does because I'm comparing
it to two reps. Two rep range, yeah, it
does build muscle, but not that much.
You need to accumulate a little bit more
volume. So, the Romanian deadlift. So,
So, now we enter
the programming strategy, which is the
top set back down set and why I love it.
And the reason why I love top set back
down set method is because
one problem with training heavy, which
is what you need to get strong,
so, to get strong, you need to lift
heavy weights because strength is a
skill and you need to be practicing like
usually over 80% of your one rep max.
However, you can't do enough volume of
that. You can't do enough of that to
maintain muscle building
in the long term because it's too
fatiguing to be using those loads for
your muscle building rep ranges and
volumes. So, volume is a huge
contributor to muscle hypertrophy.
Bodybuilders use tons more volume than
powerlifters because powerlifters use
these more weight and it's more
fatiguing to do as much volume. So, this
is where you get a little bit of the
best of both worlds, where if all I did
was a, you know, heavy weights and
doubles, I'm not able to accumulate
enough volume to achieve meaningful
hypertrophy in the long term. But at the
same time, as a strength athlete, as a
powerlifter, I need to be practicing my
heavy lifts. So, what's the solution?
The solution is the top set back down
set method, where you practice your
heavy weight, you practice the skill of
the heavy weight on the top set, but
then we reduce the loads so that we can
accumulate a good amount of volume so
that we can maintain our progression in
muscle hypertrophy. So, my strategy with
the top set back down set method is to
do your top set at a very high RPE. You
know, I I'm sitting here saying that was
easy, but what does easy mean? That was
probably like an RPE 8 and 1/2, 9. Like
it was still a pretty high RPE. I was
saying it's easy cuz I was thinking, I
hope it's not an RPE 10. I hope it's not
limit or even fail. So, that's That was
my context when I said easy. It was
pretty hard. But now my back down work,
I want to leave strategically leave more
repetitions in reserve so that I can
accumulate more volume. So, the
objective now is to strip enough weight.
A lot of people when they do top set
back down set method, they do it in a
different way, where they do their back
down sets still quite heavy. And in my
opinion, that's quite fatiguing. The
idea of it is to reduce the intensity so
we can accumulate more volume. So,
that's My plan today was 260 for a
double as a top set and then the back
down work, I'm going to be doing sets of
200, four sets of six. So, let's see how
that feels. I'll be doing a couple of
back down sets. Something like It
depends. Today I want to do Usually when
I I program, depends how close to
competition. I'm not competing. So, for
me, I should really be doing about three
back down sets. So, a lot of the times
for my highest level athletes, I'll do
one top set, one back down set as they
get really, really close to competition.
And then the further away from
competition, the more back down work you
can actually do because volume
contributes to fatigue and that's one of
the first things you need to start
reducing as you get closer to
competition is the volume so that you
can express maximum performance. So, for
my high level lifters going into
competition, you know, a few weeks out,
it could be one top set and one back
down set. You know, more weeks out,
like, you know, six to eight weeks out,
two to three back down sets. Um you
know, and then of course, the stronger
you are, the heavier weight you lift,
the less volume you should be doing. So,
it gets pretty complex and it's kind of
like not a matter of, you know, two
weeks out you should do this amount of
volume. It depends. Strong lifters
should be doing less volume than weaker
lifters. Uh and that's that's a rule
that's I set in stone. And the reason
being is volume should be comprised of
reps times sets times the amount of
weight that you're lifting. Reps times
sets times load. So, it's volume load is
what you should be considering when
we're thinking about how much total
volume that we're performing. So, an
example of that is you've got one lifter
doing 10 sets of 10 on 100 kg. The next
lifter is doing 10 sets of 10 on 200 kg.
Same reps and sets, that's 100 total
reps, but the amount of weight the
amount of volume performed by the person
doing it on 200 kg is double the amount
of volume load. So, they're doing twice
the amount of volume and if you compare
the size of those two lifters, the
person doing 200 kg for that amount
would be a lot bigger, a lot stronger,
and at the end of that session, they
would be pretty damn beaten up compared
to the person doing 10 by 10 of 100 kg,
even if they were both at their relative
kind of limits. The person lifting the
heavier loads, it's just more work even
though they're stronger. So, therefore,
I probably wouldn't and I've never
programmed someone to do 10 by 10 on 200
kg cuz it usually I'd say not you're
kind of too strong to do that much
volume. Not saying it hasn't been done,
just saying it's not what I would do.
All right,
you know, something that I say with
these is like I do a lot of talking
while I'm teaching you guys, which means
I'm deemphasizing the focus of my work.
So, what I'm going to do is just a quick
feel set, you know, 170 should feel
light, but after talking a lot, um I
kind of switch off and then it starts
feeling really heavy. So, what I'm going
to do is I'm going to chill out. When I
say chill out, I mean not chill out at
all. I'm going to focus on the weight.
So, I'm going to do a feel set of 170
and then I'm going to put on the working
weight.
>> [snorts]
>> Easy but hard.
I don't know how to explain that. It's
easy but hard. Huh?
Hey? Comfortable? Comfortable?
Not very. Like I'd say that you're
probably more comfortable sitting there
watching me.
You know, but comfortable for yeah, for
what it's designed for, which is
to be able to accumulate volume with
more repetitions in reserve.
>> [panting and sighs]
>> But decent weight. I feel like those
were definitely
stimulating reps.
And
not taking them to failure is going to
allow me to get
more sets. And that accumulation of
volume
is probably going to contribute to more
long-term hypertrophy and strength gain
than if I was to just do another set to
absolute fail.
If I did another set to fail
or did a set to fail,
it would no doubt negatively impact the
quality of the rest of my session. So,
that means
my next set
won't be able to do as much weight. I'd
be fatigued
and the quality of those sets won't be
as good.
Additionally,
what's that fatigue, the accumulation of
that fatigue, going to do for the rest
of my sessions
during the week? That's what you always
need to factor in.
Is
you know, I'm going to do squat days
squat session in a couple of days
and this is going to fry my posterior
chain,
which I absolutely need for my squat
session.
So, that's why don't want to fry my
posterior chain
that much. I want to leave
reps in reserve
so that I can have a quality a high
quality entire session as well as a high
quality training week.
Anyway, I've got to stay switched on. Do
another set.
>> [sighs]
[panting]
[snorts]
>> Okay.
I kind of have the music off
deliberately so that you can hear my
breathing.
It's a common question that I'm asked is
when do you breathe with your deadlifts?
So, with a conventional deadlift, I have
a full belly of air
for the concentric portion and then
I kind of just dump at the top. It's a
controlled drop. So, I don't need a
brace
on the way down. Same with my
stiff-legged deadlift.
But my Romanian deadlift, when I am
focusing on the eccentric portion, I'm
taking two breaths.
I need a full belly of air for the
concentric
and then I
re-brace [snorts] for the eccentric.
Well, I
take one breath for the whole thing, but
that breath starts at the top. So,
you'll hear me exhale
one on completion and then I'll inhale,
brace,
>> [snorts and sighs]
>> So, it gets pretty tiring and you kind
of need to breathe, especially when
you're doing high rep sets.
And uh a quote from a my dear friend
and mentor, Andrew Lock,
he said, "You'll breathe eventually."
So, I quite like that. When you're
lifting
lighter loads with high reps,
the brace
the breath hold with a brace isn't as
important. You'd be strong enough to do
it without but when we're going super
heavy and the breath hold is a pretty
important part of that brace,
that's how you do it with the
with the Romanian deadlift where we're
focusing on the eccentric portion. You
exhale at the top
and then
>> [snorts]
>> brace, down up, exhale,
brace,
down up,
exhale.
And that's how you breathe with a
Romanian deadlift.
>> [sighs]
>> Man,
see that? I'll do a set
and then
I try and give it to you tutorial and
I'm still
fighting fighting for dear life
to get my breath back.
I'm not that unfit, I promise.
That was good. That was good. So, you
know, top set is uh
you know, one top single, sorry, top
double, 260 for a double, and then two
by six RDLs. So, now my the remainder of
my session is going to be some leg press
with some hamstring curls and that's a
really nice posterior chain session.
That's a really nice posterior chain
session.
So, what's the posterior chain?
It's the posterior means back. The chain
is the erector spinae, the glutes, and
the hamstrings.
So, what's the odd exercise out? I would
say the leg press is. However, leg press
is a really nice exercise to include on
deadlift days
because the technique
for a conventional deadlift
is actually
one where you don't where you shouldn't
focus on posterior chain. You shouldn't
focus on hip hinge. You should focus on
leg drive. And one of the best ways to
think of the movement is to lock your
torso in place and and push the world
away like the ground is a leg press.
It's the exact same pattern. So, a lot
of the best deadlifters in the world
include leg press as a really
foundational exercise.
So, the leg press is a foundational
exercise for their for their deadlift.
So, that's my next exercise. I'm going
to do a leg press and I'm going to
superset that with hamstrings and that's
going to be my session. So,
>> [groaning and screaming]
>> 60.
No, cuz I I just did two sets of 30
and then I thought I'll do two more sets
of 30
and that's what I did.
But I just did it
in one set.
So, that's four sets of 30, but
whatever.
Like it's easy. Like the idea is
the idea is for it to be easy.
The focus is on
>> [gasps]
>> the focus is on posterior chain and this
is my accessory
and I'm just enjoying high rep.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> It's been a while since I've done 60,
but it just
just felt nice. You know what I did?
Check this out.
>> [panting]
>> So, this is one of these uh
soft belts.
I just strapped it around me and I was
just like
such a weird thing cuz I'm
not really
>> [panting and sighs]
>> holding my breath that much,
>> [gasps]
>> but I thought I'd put it on for that
last set
and it just felt nicer. It was really
loose, but it just felt nicer and I was
just
able to rep it. Anyway,
>> [clears throat]
>> so,
>> [sighs]
>> set of 60.
Who'd have thought?
Like I'm not trying to do anything, but
I was just like, "Huh, that just feels
comfortable." And it actually feels
nice.
Almost like I'm kind of doing
>> [panting and sighs]
>> uphill sprints on a bike. Not that
that's ever anything that I'd do.
But
damn, that felt really really nice.
Anyway, maybe I can make a thing of
that. But this is my accessory stuff.
The This doesn't count. How many it
does? Of course it counts. Why wouldn't
it count?
Tom Platz loves his
high rep sets of
>> [gasps]
>> squats and leg press.
He talks about 10 minutes sets.
And a lot of people with really really
big quadriceps
kind of [clears throat] talk about that.
So, right now,
I was always planning on doing high rep
sets.
>> [sighs and panting]
>> Anyway, I guess 60 reps is the thing
right now.
Not advising you to do it. Do it if you
want. And I'm going to pair this with a
hamstring curls.
>> [gasps]
>> What a pump. No. Whenever I do opposing
muscle super sets,
I wait a couple of minutes in between.
So, it's like push.
Whenever I do a set like a a pressing
session, you do a push super set with a
pull. I say super set,
but
there's two different types. Same muscle
super set and opposing muscle super set.
If it's the same muscle super set, the
idea is don't rest. You go straight into
a So, if I was to do with a leg press,
I'd go a leg press and then straight
into a leg extension, cuz we're hitting
the same muscle. The idea of that is
it's beneficial for muscle hypertrophy.
>> [gasps]
>> Taking that muscle to failure.
Opposing muscle super set
is better for kind of strength, but you
do the push and then you wait. So, for
my sets for my heavy sets, I'm waiting
I'm resting
>> [gasps]
>> anywhere between 6 to 10 minutes,
depending on what exercise that I'm
doing.
So, just then I was doing 8 minutes uh
between my deadlift sets.
So, instead of sitting down for 8
minutes, you can rest 4 minutes, do the
opposing muscle groups,
and then come back 4 minutes later. So,
you're still resting 4 minutes. So, I
still rest 8 minutes between the top leg
press sets, but instead of just doing
nothing for that 8 minutes,
I'll train the opposing muscle groups.
I'm going to do No, that was my last
set. I'm just going to do my last set of
hamstring curls. I'm not going to do
another 60.
Uh I mean, when you do a set like that,
that's another really great strategy of
training to fail. So, a lot of people
talk about do you train to fail or not
like as if you either should or you
shouldn't. It's like, well, training to
fail sometimes is a great strategy, and
it really depends on the exercise. So,
when you're doing a heavy squat or a
deadlift, leaving repetitions in
reserve, it's a complex movement. So,
leaving reps in reserve is a intelligent
way of not breaking down technique and
not risking injury.
Whereas,
>> [panting]
>> when you're coming to a machine exercise
like a leg press or any of those machine
exercises, taking those movements to
fail isn't really going to compromise
technique.
So, therefore,
why not do it? So, it's another strategy
of
train leave repetitions in reserve for
your big complex movements, squat bench
press deadlift, and then your accessory
exercise, think about strategically
training those movements to fail. So,
what do I mean by strategically
training to fail? I'm doing three sets,
and on the third set, take the last set
to fail. If I did the first set to fail,
it's going to negatively impact the
following sets. So, you do the
prescribed reps and sets for the first
couple of sets, and then on the last
set, send it. And that's what I just
did.
>> [clears throat]
[sighs and gasps]
>> Set's 12 on the hamstring curls get the
girls.
And that's my session, actually.
That's my session. All right, so
good session. I'm very happy with this.
Top set back down set explained.
Same with my theory on a few exercises.
Theory on training to fail or not. And
uh
a great session for you to follow
for posterior chain, for deadlift
accessory. So, that you can be big and
strong and have a very good deadlift.
Hope you enjoyed. Click like, subscribe,
and I'll see you guys next time.
No, curls get the girls.
People are saying biceps curls, but it's
actually hamstring curls get the girls.
Biceps get the guys.
Yeah.
>> [sighs]
>> Yeah, bro. Trust me.
Which one?
It's biceps get the guys and hamstring
curls get the girls.
That's why I don't get the girls. Ah,
see? See? Biceps don't get girls? Biceps
get the boys. Yes!
He's He gets He gets guys and biceps.
Have you been doing your bicep your
hamstring curls?
So, sometimes he gets girls as well.
Sometimes he gets Sometimes he gets
girls as well.
Ah, so it's a low quality hamstring
curls. Low quality hamstring curls get
low quality girls.
Okay. You better do high quality
hamstring curls then.
Well, unless you want to have high
quality biceps.
>> [sighs]
>> Depends what you're after.
>> [snorts]
>> No discrimination. No.